Hello and welcome to Python Bytes, where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to
your earbuds. This is episode 486, recorded June 30th, 2026. I'm Michael Kennedy.
And I'm Calvin Hendryx-Parker.
This episode is brought to you by us. Check out Six Feet Up if you want not just a consulting
partner, but an impactful consulting for good partner. And if you're looking to do better at
Python, data science, AI, check out Talk Python Training. I have three courses in the works right
which is interesting.
So there's going to be a lot of new stuff.
So be sure to either keep listening here
where I'll tell you about it or sign up over there.
And speaking of signing up,
pythonbytes.fm,
click on the newsletter.
You can sign up there and get notifications every week
as well as follow us on social media.
We got all the links for the show,
Calvin and me.
Now, Calvin, your first item
is something that has been sitting
in a browser tab on my computer
for at least three days.
I'm like, oh, I need to read this.
Come on now.
And I haven't gotten to it.
So I'm really happy you're going to take care of that for me.
Well, how could you not mention this? There was a talk at PyCon 2026, and it's a perennial talk
that has probably happened for the last two decades, starting with Larry Hastings. I didn't
go look up exactly what year he started doing the Gilectomy project, but the idea is find free
threading in Python, past, present, and future. So there's been a lot of discussion in the past.
Like I said, there's over two decades of history going into solving this problem. This gets back
into Python and the global interpreter lock and what we've done in the past to try and improve
performance. So for those who are kind of new to Python, that a global interpreter lock really
makes it difficult to run a single Python process and leverage multiple cores in your computers.
But every modern computer today has how many, even the Raspberry Pis have many cores in them. So this
would be a huge boost, we think, to Python to be able to take advantage of more computing power
going on inside those CPUs. So basically the GIL has prevented this true multi-threaded parallelism
in CPython since the very beginning. There's been multiple attempts. Many of them have failed on
performance grounds. Once you remove this global interpreter lock, that overhead of managing IO,
memory, etc., all the pieces going back and forth, usually adds in 100% or more additional
performance load than giving you the performance you'd think you'd get by leveraging multiple CPUs.
We got free threading in what Python 3.13 was experimental. And so it's still a 20 to 40%
single threaded slowdown. 3.14 brought that from kind of zero to 10%. So look for Python 3.15
coming in October to deliver basically a unified story here. They've made a huge amount of progress
here. During the talk, it's interesting because this always brings out the OG Pythonistas,
the core developers in the room for these kinds of talks. Actually, one of the members of our team
was in that talk at PyCon. Larry Hastings got up to the mic and Thomas Wooters, basically,
they both kind of played off each other on how this all came about. And the punchline was the
things that made this possible didn't exist when Larry was trying to do this. So there's been a ton
of development and innovation in the Python core to make this all go. The big part about this is now
that we're going to have a unified ABI. So like basically the interfaces into using this free
threading is going to be more unified, which means the same extension binaries, like if you're writing
C extensions, can work both on the gil and on free threaded builds. And looks like already greater
than 50% of the PyPy binary wheels support free threading. So that's a huge, well the top, sorry,
top PyPy binaries, not all of them, but of the major ones, we've already got half adoption.
I think that's a huge boost. I think there was a prediction made on from the stage that
free-threaded may become the default version of Python, but we'll see what happens.
Oh, excellent.
So have you followed along with this Gil story, Michael?
Yeah, everyone has.
I love at least having the capability to do threading. I would love to see this kind of
seamlessly integrated into async io i was just reading a reddit post about somebody who was
hating on async io async and await in particular and no it might not be the cleanest easiest
programming model in the world not python in particular but just in general but it's better
than managing a bunch of threads or processes or you know it's it's i think it's really quite neat
and lightweight but it's big limitation is as soon as you get anything computational boom
like the whole thing stops right yeah and so if you could just say you know put a decorator onto
a function like cpu bound or something or somehow you know kick it off with some kind of you know
computational thing but clearly like just await make that awaitable in the same event loop that
would be awesome yeah no this is a really good article from the Linux weekly news uh really in
depth coverage by jake on this site so i highly recommend folks who are interested in the history
and what the future is going to be,
check this out because we're finally going to have
free threading in Python.
Awesome.
So if you were running like a Django site,
I don't know, wouldn't it be cool?
Wouldn't it be cool to, I don't know,
search your admin site in the same way that you do?
No, Michael.
Like really nice, say, Visual Studio code.
You can hit shift command P for your command palette
or in Vivaldo, you can just hit command K
and you could say, I don't know,
copy all the links on the page by just typing a thing or two.
So thanks to Adam Parkin, I introduce Django admin site search.
And it's quite a slick thing.
It's fairly new.
It could use some more stars.
So there, it got one more.
In real time.
Real time update.
Yeah, so you just hit command K like I just did in Vivaldi.
And by the way, if you do Vivaldi, you might need to remap one or the other, but whatever.
And then it brings up this nice search.
People probably familiar with this with some of the docs, like, the great
docs, docs have this and lots of others, but the idea is that it's really
deeply integrated into understanding what your, your Django needs.
So there's a little, little animated video here as by the way,
everyone out there building this, if you're building something specifically
to do with UI at a minimum needs a screenshot.
I've seen like entire, like web website design frameworks that have had like
zero, zero pictures.
I'm like, I have no idea what you're talking about.
Like the words sound good, but picture people.
They'll resort to interpretive dance before they'll
put a screencast in.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
So the idea is it just works out of the box, basically very little config.
It's when you type something into it, it searches app labels, model labels
and fields and model instances.
And what's cool about it is it can search in two different ways.
So for smaller sites or sort of ad hoc searches, it will
and dunder, I can, not a dunder,
underscore underscore I contains,
which is, is any part of this text
I've typed contained within here
without regard to case, right?
That's cool, but that's not always indexed, right?
I mean, not every single field has an index
for these sorts of things.
So that can be slow on large projects.
So you can also tell it,
use the model admins get search results method,
which can be an indexed query.
That's cool, right?
That's super cool.
And this is super nice.
I've seen a couple of people doing work on the admin.
This is a much-needed feature.
Yeah, I think it's really neat.
It has a built-in auth, so users can only search apps and models
that they have permissions to view.
Results appear on type.
It's active search, I guess, is the way you would describe it.
And keyboard navigation.
So obviously Command K, like I said.
It's a must.
It's a good one.
You know what?
I think, no.
I think, yeah, I think that's the default on Chrome.
trying to figure out if that is, which one is it? I may have changed it. I think maybe command E is
the default on, I'm sorry, Vivaldi for its command palette, but you know, it's layers of command
palettes you might have to battle with. Anyway, it supports all the way back to 3.8. They don't even
care if Python's supported. They're going to support it. And Django 3.2 to 6. So yeah, that's
pretty much it. Super easy to add in. Not a lot, not a lot to do there, but it's customizable.
Yeah. No, I like that. I mean, as a Django developer, that's definitely a missing piece
because I feel like it's like the old days of the internet
where there was no search
and you had to always know where to browse to
to find the things in the admin console.
Yeah.
This is going to save a lot of people a lot of time,
especially if you've got a larger Django app
and you've got hundreds of models in there.
Like this is going to be a lifesaver.
And some people use the admin section
for like all the admin staff of the Django site.
I don't recommend that, but...
I don't know.
I don't know either, but people do.
And so having this to navigate it,
I think would be good, right?
True.
In a last minute crunch, when you're trying to triage something, that admin is indispensable.
I guess it depends, though.
You know, is this an internal company app that 20 people use and three people admin?
Yeah.
How serious you got to take that versus Instagram?
Right.
I bet it's not admin through the admin.
We should get some, we should find out.
We should get some inside news into whether they use the admin or not.
What if it is?
No, you should see ours.
Our is amazing.
Well, I can tell you right now, someone's going to mention it in the comments.
they're going to call us out.
Let's do it.
We could ask an AI about it, probably.
A local AI.
And local AI, actually, this is really exciting.
I have been certainly on the bleeding edge of local AIs for quite some time,
running them on my framework desktop here.
And then I've always managed to try and buy a MacBook Pro with Apple Silicon
and then about as much memory as I can afford.
And so being able to run these local models has been mostly an experiment up to this date.
Gemma 4 has gotten really good.
Some of them, you know, Mistral, Dev, and Devstral have been really interesting for live coding agents.
But this article that came across my feed today, multiple people in the company actually posted this,
which is Quinn 3.627B is the sweet spot for local development.
So there's a couple models that just got released in the Quinn family of open weights models.
There's also a quantized version of it and a multi-token prediction version of this model out there, which gets some pretty blazing speed.
On his M5 MacBook Max, he was getting 32 tokens per second with the 8-bit quantized version of it.
But if you run the 4-bit quantization, you can actually run it on a 32 gigabyte or less MacBook machine, and you get pretty blazing speeds.
I think they put a chart in here on the bottom.
But the nice bit about this article
is he compares the various models,
what they're capable of inside the same family.
And it actually gives you a whole how-to
on how to hook this up using LLAMA CPP and OpenCode.
And so you can actually rebuild the demos
that the author wrote here.
So using OpenCode, hooked it up,
and then wrote up a Minesweeper app,
and then again went into some depth
on the performance metrics here.
So you can see the 3635B A3B model on the Apple MLX,
85 tokens per second running with that model.
That is incredibly usable.
But the real sweet spot for the development
was using Lama CPP and getting 32 tokens per second
using about 42 gig of RAM.
So if you've got a 64 gig machine,
this is absolutely doable for developers
that are out there today and felt like it was,
I mean, this is not gonna be like mind blowing
for anyone who's already using frontier level models like Opus and Sonnet and GPT-55 Codex to
do code, but this is local. Everything stays on your machine. The data never leaves. It's tool
using, so there's still risk. You're using models that have been trained by foreign nations and who
knows what's going on inside of these things, but this one seems to be gaining a lot of traction
and actually producing, you know, I don't think it's mythos level yet, but we're only, what, maybe
six, nine months behind on open waste models that I can run myself. So this looks really good.
The interesting thing he also pointed out in the article was, and I wasn't aware of it,
the, I've been an OLAMA user for quite some time. And I think I'm going to be switching to the
LAMA CPP version. There's, there's been some authorship and IP concerns between the two groups
that I wasn't aware of. And I think I feel like to be responsible, I should switch over to using
that or I'm considering VLLM on my framework desktop so that I can run multiple models
simultaneously and have multiple instances of the same model running so that, for example,
my home assistant can have multiple people in the house make requests simultaneously.
So this is pretty exciting. I can't, I've not tried 3.6. I have 3.5 currently running
on my desktop at the moment. And that has been impressive from a home assistant standpoint. I've
not used it for much of my coding agents, but I'm going to give 3.6.27b a real shot using
I've been using, again, Pi, still my daily driver.
There was a new release of Superpowers since our last episode
that has made the Pi experience a lot more user-friendly and smooth.
So check that out with Quinn36.
It's really neat.
One thing is, can you pull up that speed?
Yeah.
I love how they have like a heat picture.
It's definitely going to heat up your laptop if you're using these tools.
What surprises me on macOS is that MLX is the slowest.
i know i was surprised that too i think he mentions it down here in the text um rtx consumer rtx if
you've got enough vram on that card that is the way to go if you're serious about running these
models i believe but just the standard llama cpp plus mtp uh with that quantized version 105 tokens
per second that's but but 32 tokens per second is plenty fast for doing code dev where you're
you're in it you're reviewing you're using it as a true assistant and you're not trying to just
vibe code away an app. Another takeaway that when I see anything like this, definitely a cool topic,
is I don't know what percentage of people it is out there. Maybe I'd love to hear your thoughts
on this, but I think there's certainly a strong contingent of people out there who want AI to go
away or think the bubble's going to burst and it's just not worth getting into or paying attention to.
Like I know OpenAI or Anthropic or whatever, the whole thing is just going to go up like in a
smoking dumpster fire in six months so why would I change the way I work and
melt my brain and whatever else you leave people say about it this stuff is
not going away this is on this is here right this is on a hugging face the
models are published on hugging face this is open open source and published I
say open source I shouldn't say open source they're open weights some of the
models are fully open source but this is this is sustainable maintainable and a
sides of that equation, the answer lies in the middle. And the answer really is that these tools
are great amplifiers of your existing skills. So if you're already good at the software development
lifecycle, these things make you better. If you're not good at it, these things can make you worse.
Exactly. You have no idea? That's called vibe coding.
Right. Let's all be realistic about what this is all about.
Yeah. And I'm also jealous of your framework.
So, I mean, side note, Apple raised their prices this week on MacBook Pros.
I went and double checked and Framework had raised their prices too.
So the same 128 gigabyte machine is like about six or $700 more than it was a year ago.
Wow.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Maybe I'll have a...
I was going to start this episode with a good morning.
Good morning, everyone.
at apple we're so we've been so honored and proud to have pretty good fleeced you on ram and
on nvvm that today we're taking it to an entirely new level like
oh my goodness yeah so the price is like you're gonna be you're gonna be excited michael oh boy
let me tell you what we we're gonna bring on calvin to show you what we've built and boy is
expensive no like seriously just really quick follow-up to the sidebar like my i think my macbook
pro 16 inch which i just bought just received i bought it a little bit before because it took a
while but just got two weeks ago something like that i think it went up eight hundred dollars yeah
i i luckily i bought two in preparation for this prior to the rise in price so i just saved
myself sixteen hundred dollars that's awesome there's some guy math we could do there's totally
some guy math going on here all right what are we gonna spend it on let's let's exactly let's talk
about uh we're spinning on motorcycles calvin you know what we're gonna spend it we're absolutely
gonna spend our motorcycles so i would i would like to tell people about what might be the largest
single PEP except finalization in in one batch ever good go on that sounds like this sounds
exciting it sounds exciting it's more interest like oh that's weird interesting so all in one
one go i believe these are right perhaps i might be off by i think i might be off by one anyway
it's basically six six eight six eight seven six nine one there's like 10 peps or something that
got fine with the final just all at one shot then when you look at them carefully so i i linked to
the um 11 yeah it's 11 false chains i linked to the commit that did all this and so you'll see
like if we expand it here, the diff is not always perfect.
Pep 668 making Python based environments externally managed.
But if you go over and you check out Pep Pep 668, which is here, it was created.
Wow.
May 20, 2021.
House clean.
Others are like 2023 and so on.
So what had happened here?
Oh gosh, I forgot who, who did the switch.
I guess I could probably look at the commit zero intensity, which is
Peter, I didn't really need to click on that. In fact, that was useless. Peter Birma,
core developer, did all this. And what it really is, is there have been all these peps that were
sitting in accepted, but not final. And accepted means, well, accepted final means it's shipping.
But clearly the one that went, was out and accepted and final in 2021 is out. So there's
just a bunch of peps 11 in particular that were just hanging around and never ever got moved to
final for some reason you know reasons i don't know someone was not a completionist exactly yes
yeah exactly someone's like oh we're gonna get all the little badges baby all the badges that we put
on here yeah so for example this one is uh 2022 october 2022 and so on so i just think this
is kind of interesting and people have been looking at these these older peps and going like
Why is this not final?
Why is it just accepted?
Well, you called it out.
Not completionist.
Yeah, I'm glad.
Well, it's nice to see those all cleaned up
so that at least there's a canonical source of the truth here.
Yeah, absolutely.
I totally agree.
Bit of comment out in the audience here.
We've got Pixel.
It says, like the sentence,
it makes you worth if you don't know the software cycle.
Because I saw people during Vibe Coding, and they're happy,
but they didn't know what it actually makes them worth.
But yeah, it's interesting.
Very true statement.
Yeah.
And also, yes, also being a subject matter expert combined with some coding skills is absolutely.
100%.
It does make being a generalist a little more useful.
Yeah, actually.
Not exclusively, but also.
I finally come into my own being the generalist that I am.
Yes, exactly.
Me too.
My time is here.
It's incredible.
I can do all the things.
Well, I mean, I've just found myself building so much more stuff now.
Like I know the patterns I wanted to get done.
And it was just a lot of busy work that I didn't feel like doing.
but now I can make those tools super quick.
I love it.
Big fan.
Yeah, big fan, big fan.
And it's like, well, if it took me two hours, this is worth it.
If it took me two weeks, it's not worth it.
Totally.
Now it takes you two hours.
That's absolutely the math.
All right.
And you can power it over your framework in the basement.
Okay.
That's true.
So let's go and jump into extras.
Yes.
And I already got my screen up, so I'll just grab the first one here.
Go for it.
So I wrote a blog post inspired by a guy named Pito,
who had reached out to us because you and I both were a fan talking about how
ELS instead of LS is quite cool.
It is quite cool.
You can go and when you LS on something,
if you alias it,
although that has some drawbacks,
it uses color for like hidden file,
like GitHub.
.github is shown if you LS,
even though it's technically hidden,
but it uses color to show that it's like .gitignored.
It shows symlinks,
which is really cool.
I've learned how to create a symlink in Git.
So when you check it out, it's symlinks on the new machine, which is always fun.
Use this icon, all this stuff is super cool.
But Pito pointed out something is weird with installing this package.
If you click on the PyPI link, it says version six, some of the links
404, which is kind of weird.
But then if I actually go and click on say the repository, it takes me to
the rust based ones like, oh, this must be the rust one.
Because when I go to the PyPI and I click on the repo, it goes to the Rust one.
He points out, no, that's the Python one.
And I'm like, wait a minute, is there something sus going on with this thing?
And he inspired me to dig into it.
So what is going on is GitHub is redirecting to the newer version when you click on it.
But PyPI actually installs a frozen 2023 version.
So I wrote this really short article.
I didn't know that.
Yes, I know.
I didn't either because everything about it like redirects to the one that you think you're going to want, but it's not.
So anyway, it talks about like, okay, did you install this with uv or PIPX or somehow pip install?
If you did, you're getting the old frozen in place slower one that you think is not what you're getting, but that's what you're getting.
And here's how to actually install it.
Well, I'm going to go do that.
Yes, exactly.
So I wrote a really short write up about this.
What the PLS?
What the PLS, PLS?
Come on now.
all right kyle well if you think that makes your command line glamorous i've got something for you
you're gonna crush it they were gonna remember to your first crush this i mean because the command
line was probably my first crush if i'm gonna be honest out there and if you want your command line
to look absolutely beautiful and glamorous there's a library out here called charm that can do all
kinds of fun uh extensions so forms and uh it's got interfaces to build inside there with like
ssh animations physics based animations you know get the bubble tea component for your toolkit
so you should definitely check out uh crush or no sorry it's charm.land to add some fun bling
to your terminal so if you think that if pls was just the start uh oh my goodness charm is gonna
you're gonna be busy uh michael going down the rabbit hole dang it i was just starting to work
on some projects and now here I am.
Yeah.
Rebuilding my terminal prompt again.
Yep.
It looks pretty cool.
So I've not checked it out.
I think the open code folks may be using some of this.
But yeah, it looks like a lot of fun.
So if you want to go bling your terminal, this is a way to do it.
And it's not very popular, is it?
No, not at all.
213,000 stars over on GitHub.
Not bad.
Pretty cool.
Add some fun to your terminal.
The other bit, and I kind of already alluded to this,
was building a fully local voice assistant in 2026
using Python.
So this actually is a Raspberry Pi friendly version.
As for those of you who are following along at home,
I've been doing the more ridiculous version
with like a RTX 3070,
running my voice models on a giant graphics card.
This runs on a Raspberry Pi.
A couple of different models.
He mentions here in the article
with the full architecture and how to set it all up
and how to get it going.
And you can even run it on old Raspberry Pis.
So there's a 40 meg model, the small 015 version.
Meg.
Yeah, megabyte.
Megabyte.
Yeah.
Wow, okay.
Inaccurate, but we'll run all of those.
So if you've got a more
So it's like Siri, basically.
Yeah.
Wow, shots fired.
It's default failure mode.
This is what I found on the internet.
Yeah.
But you can see even the largest one, 1.8 gig,
you can even run that on probably the largest
just of Raspberry Pis that are out there,
or just on a CPU,
and not have to use a full blown GPU
to run your voice pipeline.
This is part of the Platypush platform,
which is not necessarily a competitive Home Assistant,
but is like Home Assistant,
in that you can glue together Zigbee
and Wi-Fi IoT devices
and all those kinds of things inside your house.
So I just thought that was really interesting
because it's on my list of things to keep up to date on,
which is I want to replace all the ladies in the box in my house,
if you know what I mean.
Yeah.
And that's what I got.
What about something?
You're a Docker person.
I am.
And you've done a lot of local Docker.
I'm more of a server Docker.
One of the things I think would be really cool,
it'd be so easy to set this into an always auto starting
and less stopped sort of Docker thing.
But at least on macOS,
can you give it access to the GPUs or NPUs?
You know what I mean?
because it's basically Linux within macOS,
which is not exactly the same.
I have not tried the GPU on Docker with macOS.
I am using this on,
I have installed Proxmox onto the AMD box downstairs
that has the CUDA card in it, the 3070 card.
And in that one, you absolutely can pass with Proxmox,
the GPU drivers.
And you just have to make sure you get the CUDA drivers installed.
Proxmox doesn't come with them out of the box.
but you can install them onto Proxmox.
And once you do, you can pass through either shared access
or dedicated access to the containers.
I'm using containers to run all my voice assistant stuff on the Proxmox.
Sweet. Okay.
So that is absolutely possible on Linux.
And Proxmox makes it just stupid easy to do.
Nice. Yeah, I have this nice Mac Mini M4 Pro sitting around.
I would love to just fire things up.
But all the stuff that requires sort of some acceleration,
it's like sometimes slower.
Maybe I don't really want it that much.
Well, since I had that RTX that was donated by my child to me, I was like, I'll use that
because it's going to be the fastest tokens per second, but it's only an eight gigabyte
VRAM.
So whatever I can fit into that eight gig goes very fast.
Yeah, perfect.
All right.
Let's finish this up with a joke.
So this one comes to us from Jeff Triplett.
This one's good.
Have you seen this?
I have seen this.
The team's been talking about it.
Yeah, it's well, I think you all should adopt this for your project.
We totally should.
You let me look. A lot of times people create this kind of little not so easy to understand thing as a way to like get creepy repeat business or to not.
You can't fire me. I'm the only one that knows how the what to do.
And CSS was already crystal clear with how to author it.
Indeed. So what we get here is a legit CSS framework called Bmoji.
It's the CSS framework that your team will actually argue about.
And so here's what's going on with this is why waste all the characters when you could have something much more discoverable or understandable with emojis?
Right. I mean, this totally makes sense. I'm here for it.
So if you don't even know. So, for example, you might want to talk about like a hero image and you want to stylize it.
So you would say joker emoji underscore underscore picture frame emoji.
And like a lot of the utility classes, you would need to like specialize that.
So you would say joker emoji underscore underscore picture emoji --star, because this is your hero.
The hero.
And then there's the editable part, which is joker emoji underscore underscore notepad editor.
If you want to have a little card, like a written card.
And then joker underscore underscore ABCD for the title.
and joker underscore underscore quote emoji for a description bit so on the footer is the best
okay the footer where's the footer oh right there the class is joker underscore underscore
foot emoji oh there it is yes it's literally the foot emoji what is the i guess the disabled is a
a ghost yeah it's perfect i mean it's obvious you read that you know you know exactly what's going
on michael yes i i guess you do once you learn to speak the emoji about the block the element
oh it's so good i want a link you just put a link emoji on it anyway i'm not sure that i'm
gonna be adopting this um i've already done a couple major framework remodels so i put it on
our tech radar yeah it's gonna be important i mean you gotta you gotta stay on top of what's coming
in the industry and sometimes yep sometimes it's a ghost emoji i think i think that's a good place
to leave it, Calvin.
That is a good place.
I love it.
Thank you all.
That was a lot of fun.
Yeah, thanks.
See you later.
See ya.